Introduction

The Badvision keyboard experiment compares two keyboards, a standard QWERTY and a Metropolis keyboard originally designed by Zhai and Smith. In addition, lighted hints are tested for any additional improvements to accuracy or speed.

-Run project

The experiment is contained in a single webpage, enabling a diverse geolocated subject pool. Participating subjects access the page on a tablet device, which is the only required equipment.

The starting page explains the time required and experiment process. This hopefully reduces confounding factors by instructing the subject to have a distraction-free environment to sit while participating.

The initial questionnaire collects demographics as well as device details.  After submission, the server records data and provides an ordering of 4 test conditions, assigned by balanced Latin squares.

-How do related experiments work

At the beginning of each trial, test conditions are explained briefly. The keyboard corresponding to current test conditions is displayed and the subject types OK to start. This serves as a quick practice to introduce each keyboard.

In each experiment trial, 5 random phrases are presented on-screen one at a time. The user types each prompt using the provided keyboard. Input appears above the keyboard while typing and the prompt letters change color to aid tracking.

No backspace is provided, but input is tolerant of typographic errors and skips. This allows easier analysis of errors overall.  After completing a prompt, a new prompt will appear until all five are entered.

After testing, a closing questionnaire elicits user feedback followed by a final thank you message indicating completion.

-What are unfinished parts

The test apparatus user interface is complete and undergoing only minor revisions to the introduction wording and overall styling. The server side currently does not record any data or provide analysis.  The text prompts are not uniform length and need some adjustments.

Describe code

Keyboard hints are provided via a Markov chain model, generated by a python workbook from the set of prompts used in the experiment. The prediction model is only based on the previous 1 or 2 characters, sufficient to offer at least 3 or 4 predictions. These are not meant to challenge best-of-breed predictive models but to provide an ideal simulation so the user is not distracted by poor recommendations and locate the correct key.

Apparatus code is written in ECMA 6, with Node.JS on the server side to handle data storage via flat files. The page itself is HTML, with questionnaires and layout placeholders in the markup. The javascript handles the application state, showing and hiding questionnaires, and finally running each of the trial conditions, rendering the keyboards, etc.  Keyboards themselves are laid out using flexbox markup and CSS styling. Likewise the hints and keypress styles are all CSS-driven. At the very start, all phrases are shuffled using Durstenfeld's algorithm and divided into sets of 5.

When submitting questionnaires,  the browser includes device details as well as timestamps in the recorded data.  Once each trial begins, the browser collects the timestamp when a prompt appears, and the timestamps of each successive keystroke. It also records if a key was correct, incorrect, or skipped. Other data about the original prompt vs. typed response is also retained. At the end of each trial the recorded data is sent to the server and recorded for later analysis.

Objective of what I am doing

Ultimately I want to reproduce the near 50-wpm performance of Metropolis keyboard that Zhai and Smith reported. I also want to demonstrate how highlighted key suggestions improve performance because  modern gaming keyboards can adopt this feature. Additionally feedback from subjects with regular typing difficulties is valuable to determine if further application of Metropolis offers a social benefit.

Process flow: (Note: Render with sequencediagram.org)
title General apparatus flow

actor Subject

UI->Subject: Render initial questionnaire
Subject->UI: Submit first questionnaire
UI->Server: Post questionnaire and device details
Server->Server:Store answers in flat file
Server->UI: Provide order of test conditions
UI->UI: Prepare tests, randomize prompts
loop for each of 4 test conditions
UI->Subject: Show trial instructions
Subject->UI: Types OK
loop for each of 5 prompts
activate UI
UI->Subject: Show new prompt
activate Subject
Subject->UI: Types prompt
deactivate Subject
deactivate UI
end 
UI->Server: Send trial data
Server->Server: Store in flat file
end
UI->Subject: Show closing questionnaire
Subject->UI: Submit answers
UI->Server: Send closing questionnaire data
Server->Server: Store questionnaire data
UI->Subject: Show closing thank you message
